reference: add TiDB cluster alert rules (#1475)
pingcap/docs: dev/reference/alert-rules.md

---
title: TiDB Cluster Alert Rules
summary: Learn the alert rules in a TiDB cluster.
category: reference
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD024 -->

# TiDB Cluster Alert Rules

This document describes the alert rules for different components in a TiDB cluster, including the rule descriptions and solutions of the alert items in TiDB, TiKV, PD, TiDB Binlog, Node_exporter and Blackbox_exporter.

## TiDB alert rules

> This section gives the alert rules for the TiDB component. Each alert rule is classified according to their severity level - emergency, critical or warning.

Reviewer: To make the severity level relationship clearer.

```suggestion
This section gives the alert rules for the TiDB component. According to the severity level, alert rules can be divided into three categories (from high to low): emergency-level, critical-level, warning-level.
```

Author: Updated. PTAL again. @lilin90

---
title: TiDB Cluster Alert Rules
summary: Learn the alert rules in a TiDB cluster.
category: reference
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD024 -->

# TiDB Cluster Alert Rules

This document describes the alert rules for different components in a TiDB cluster, including the rule descriptions and solutions of the alert items in TiDB, TiKV, PD, TiDB Binlog, Node_exporter and Blackbox_exporter.

> According to the severity level, alert rules can be divided into three categories (from high to low): emergency-level, critical-level and warning-level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to the severity level, alert rules are divided into three categories (from high to low): emergency-level, critical-level and warning-level.
```

Emergency-level alerts are often caused by a service or node failure. Manual intervention is required immediately.

#### `TiDB_schema_error`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_session_schema_lease_error_total{type="outdated"}[15m]) > 0`

* Description:

    The latest schema information is not reloaded in TiDB within one lease. When TiDB fails to continue providing services, an alert is triggered.

* Solution:

    It is often caused by an unavailable Region or a TiKV timeout. You need to locate the issue by checking the TiKV monitoring items.

#### `TiDB_tikvclient_region_err_total`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_tikvclient_region_err_total[10m]) > 6000`

* Description:

    When TiDB accesses TiKV, a Region error occurs. When the error is reported over 6000 times in 10 minutes, an alert is triggered.

* Solution:

    View the monitoring status of TiKV.

#### `TiDB_domain_load_schema_total`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_domain_load_schema_total{type="failed"}[10m]) > 10`

* Description:

    The total number of failures to reload the latest schema information in TiDB. If the reloading failure occurs over 10 times in 10 minutes, an alert is triggered.

* Solution:

>     Same as [`TiDB_schema_error`](#-tidb-schema-error).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Same as [`TiDB_schema_error`](#tidb-schema-error).
```

#### `TiDB_monitor_keep_alive`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_monitor_keep_alive_total[10m]) < 100`

* Description:

    Indicates whether the TiDB process still exists. If the number of times for `tidb_monitor_keep_alive_total` increases less than 100 in 10 minutes, the TiDB process might already exit and an alert is triggered.

* Solution:

    * Check whether the TiDB process is out of memory.
    * Check whether the machine has restarted.

### Critical-level alerts

For the critical-level alerts, a close watch on the abnormal metrics is required.

#### `TiDB_server_panic_total`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_server_panic_total[10m]) > 0`

* Description:

>     The number of the panicked TiDB threads. When a panic occurs, an alert is triggered. The thread is often recovered, otherwise, TiDB will frequently restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The number of panicked TiDB threads. When a panic occurs, an alert is triggered. Generally, the panicked thread is recovered. Otherwise, TiDB will frequently restart.
```

* Solution:

    Collect the panic logs to locate the issue.

### Warning-level alerts

Warning-level alerts are a reminder for an issue or error.

#### `TiDB_memory_abnormal`

* Alert rule:

    `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes{job="tidb"} > 1e+10`

* Description:

>     The monitoring on the TiDB memory usage. if the usage exceeds 10 G, an alert is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The monitoring on the TiDB memory usage. If the usage exceeds 10 G, an alert is triggered.
```

* Solution:

    Use the HTTP API to troubleshoot the goroutine leak issue.

#### `TiDB_query_duration`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(tidb_server_handle_query_duration_seconds_bucket[1m])) BY (le, instance)) > 1`

* Description:

>     The latency of handling a request in TiDB. if the 99th percentile latency exceeds 1 second, an alert is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The latency of handling a request in TiDB. If the 99th percentile latency exceeds 1 second, an alert is triggered.
```

* Solution:

>     View the TiDB logs and search for the `SLOW_QUERY` and `TIME_COP_PROCESS` keywords to locate the slow SQL queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    View TiDB logs and search for the `SLOW_QUERY` and `TIME_COP_PROCESS` keywords to locate the slow SQL queries.
```

#### `TiDB_server_event_error`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(tidb_server_server_event{type=~"server_start|server_hang"}[15m]) > 0`

* Description:

    The number of events that happen in the TiDB service. An alert is triggered when the following events happen:

    1. start: The TiDB service starts.

>     2. hang: When a critical-level event (currently there’s only one scenario: TiDB cannot write binlog) happens, TiDB enters the `hang` mode and waits to be killed manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. hang: When a critical-level event (currently there is only one scenario: TiDB cannot write binlog) happens, TiDB enters the `hang` mode and waits to be killed manually.
```

    When the number of DDL tasks pending for execution in TiDB exceeds 5, an alert is triggered.

* Solution:

    Check whether there is any time-consuming `add index` operation that is being executed by running `admin show ddl`.

## PD alert rules

This section gives the alert rules for the PD component.

### Emergency-level alerts

Emergency-level alerts are often caused by a service or node failure. Manual intervention is required immediately.

#### `PD_cluster_offline_tikv_nums`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_cluster_status{type="store_down_count"}) > 0`

* Description:

    PD has not received a TiKV heartbeat for a long time (the default configuration is 30 minutes).

* Solution:

    * Check whether the TiKV process is normal, the network is isolated or the load is too high, and recover the service as much as possible.
    * If the TiKV cannot be recovered, you can make it offline.

### Critical-level alerts

For the critical-level alerts, a close watch on the abnormal metrics is required.

#### `PD_etcd_write_disk_latency`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(etcd_disk_wal_fsync_duration_seconds_bucket[1m])) by (instance,job,le)) > 1`

* Description:

>     etcd writes data to disk with a slower speed than normal. It might lead to PD leader timeout or failure to store TSO on disk in time, which will shut down the service of the entire cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    etcd writes data to disk at a lower speed than normal. It might lead to PD leader timeout or failure to store TSO on disk in time, which will shut down the service of the entire cluster.
```

* Solution:

>     * Find the cause of slow writes. It might be other services that overload the system. You can check whether PD itself occupies a large amount of CPU or IO resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Find the cause of slow writes. It might be other services that overload the system. You can check whether PD itself occupies a large amount of CPU or I/O resources.
```

    * Try to restart PD or manually transfer leader to another PD to recover the service.

>     * Make offline and replace the PD with issues if it cannot be recovered due to environmental factors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * If the problematic PD instance cannot be recovered due to environmental factors, make it offline and replace it.
```

Reviewer: Please check whether it is PD "instance" or "node" here.

Author: Please take a look at Lilian's comment. @rleungx

#### `PD_miss_peer_region_count`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_regions_status{type="miss_peer_region_count"}) > 100`

* Description:

>     The number of Region replicas is smaller than the value of `max-replicas`. When the TiKV is down and its downtime exceeds `max-down-time`, it usually leads to missing replicas for some Regions during a period of time. When a TiKV node is made offline, it might result in a small number of Regions with missing replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The number of Region replicas is smaller than the value of `max-replicas`. When TiKV is down and its downtime exceeds `max-down-time`, it usually leads to missing replicas for some Regions during a period of time. When a TiKV node is made offline, it might result in missing replicas in a small number of Regions.
```

* Solution:

>     * Find the cause of the issue by checking whether there is any TiKV that is down or being made offline.

Reviewer: TiKV instance or node? Please make it clearer.

>     * Watch the region health panel and see whether `miss_peer_region_count` is continuously decreasing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Watch the Region health panel and see whether `miss_peer_region_count` is continuously decreasing.
```

### Warning-level alerts

Warning-level alerts are a reminder for an issue or error.

#### `PD_cluster_lost_connect_tikv_nums`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_cluster_status{type="store_disconnected_count"}) > 0`

* Description:

    PD does not receive a TiKV heartbeat within 20 seconds. Normally a TiKV heartbeat comes in every 10 seconds.

* Solution:

>     * Check whether the TiKV is being restarted.

Reviewer: `the TiKV` is not a complete phrase. We can use `the TiKV instance/node` or just the lone `TiKV`, but not `the TiKV`. Please check and update all similar occurrences in this PR. Thanks!

    * Check whether the TiKV process is normal, the network is isolated, and the load is too high, and recover the service as much as possible.
    * If you confirm that the TiKV cannot be recovered, you can make it offline.
    * If you confirm that the TiKV can be recovered, but not in the short term, you can consider increasing the value of `max-down-time`. It will prevent the TiKV from being considered as irrecoverable and the data from being removed from the TiKV.

#### `PD_cluster_low_space`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_cluster_status{type="store_low_space_count"}) > 0`

* Description:

    Indicates that there is no sufficient space on the TiKV node.

* Solution:

>     * Check whether there is no sufficient space in the cluster in general. If so, you need to increase its capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Check whether the space in the cluster is generally insufficient. If yes, increase its capacity.
```

>     * Check whether there is any issue with Region balance scheduling, which leads to unevenly distributed data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Check whether there is any issue with Region balance scheduling. If yes, it can lead to uneven data distribution.
```

    * Check whether there is any file that occupies a large amount of disk space, such as the log, snapshot, core dump, etc.
    * Lower the Region weight of the node to reduce the data volume.

>     * When it is not possible to release the space, you can consider proactively making the node offline. This prevents insufficient disk space that leads to downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When it is not possible to release the space, consider proactively making the node offline to avoid insufficient disk space that leads to downtime.
```

* Solution:

    * Check the network and system load status.
    * Make offline and replace the PD with issues if it cannot be recovered due to environmental factors.

#### `PD_tidb_handle_requests_duration`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(pd_client_request_handle_requests_duration_seconds_bucket{type="tso"}[1m])) by (instance,job,le)) > 0.1`

* Description:

    It takes a longer time for PD to handle the TSO request. It is often caused by a high load.

* Solution:

    * Check the load status of the server.
    * Use pprof to analyze the CPU profile of PD.
    * Manually switch the PD leader.
    * Make offline and replace the PD with issues if it cannot be recovered due to environmental issues.

#### `PD_down_peer_region_nums`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_regions_status{type="down_peer_region_count"}) > 0`

* Description:

    The number of Regions with an unresponsive peer reported by the raft leader.

* Solution:

    * Check whether there is any TiKV that is down, or that was just restarted, or that is busy.

>     * Watch the region health panel and see whether `down_peer_region_count` is continuously decreasing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Watch the Region health panel and see whether `down_peer_region_count` is continuously decreasing.
```

>     * Check the network between the TiKV servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Check the network between TiKV servers.
```

#### `PD_pending_peer_region_count`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(pd_regions_status{type="pending_peer_region_count"}) > 100`

* Description:

    There are too many Regions that have lagged Raft logs. It is normal that scheduling leads to a small number of pending peers, but if the number remains high, there might be an issue.

* Solution:

    * Watch the region health panel and see whether `pending_peer_region_count` is continuously decreasing.
    * Check the network between the TiKV servers, especially whether there is enough bandwidth.

#### `PD_leader_change`

* Alert rule:

    `count(changes(pd_server_tso{type="save"}[10m]) > 0) >= 2`

* Description:

    The PD leader is recently switched.

* Solution:

    * Exclude the human factors, such as restarting PD, manually transferring leader, adjusting leader priority, etc.
    * Check the network and system load status.

>     * Make offline and replace the PD with issues if it cannot be recovered due to environmental factors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * If the problematic PD instance cannot be recovered due to environmental factors, make it offline and replace it.
```

#### `PD_system_time_slow`

* Alert rule:

    `changes(pd_server_tso{type="system_time_slow"}[10m]) >= 1`

* Description:

    The system time rewind might happen.

* Solution:

    Check whether the system time is configured correctly.

#### `PD_no_store_for_making_replica`

* Alert rule:

    `increase(pd_checker_event_count{type="replica_checker", name="no_target_store"}[1m]) > 0`

* Description:

    There is no appropriate store for additional replicas.

* Solution:

    * Check whether there is enough space in the store.
    * Check whether there is any store for additional replicas according to the label configuration if it is configured.

## TiKV alert rules

This section gives the alert rules for the TiKV component.

### Emergency-level alerts

Emergency-level alerts are often caused by a service or node failure. Manual intervention is required immediately.

#### `TiKV_memory_used_too_fast`

* Alert rule:

    `process_resident_memory_bytes{job=~"tikv",instance=~".*"} - (process_resident_memory_bytes{job=~"tikv",instance=~".*"} offset 5m) > 5*1024*1024*1024`

* Description:

>     Currently, there are no TiKV monitoring items that are about memory. You can monitor the memory usage of the machines in the cluster by node_exporter. The above rule indicates that when the memory usage exceeds 5 GB within 5 minutes (the memory is occupied too fast in TiKV), an alert is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Currently, there are no TiKV monitoring items about memory. You can monitor the memory usage of machines in the cluster by node_exporter. The above rule indicates that when the memory usage exceeds 5 GB within 5 minutes (the memory is occupied too fast in TiKV), an alert is triggered.
```

* Solution:

>     Adjust the `block-cache-size` of `rockdb.defaultcf` and `rocksdb.writecf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Adjust the `block-cache-size` value of both `rockdb.defaultcf` and `rocksdb.writecf`.
```

#### `TiKV_GC_can_not_work`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(increase(tidb_tikvclient_gc_action_result{type="success"}[6h])) < 1`

* Description:

    GC is not performed successfully in a Region within 6 hours, which indicates that GC is not working properly. If GC does not run in a short term, it will not cause much trouble; but if GC keeps down, more and more versions are retained, which slows down the query.

* Solution:

    1. Perform `select VARIABLE_VALUE from mysql.tidb where VARIABLE_NAME = "tikv_gc_leader_desc"` to locate the `tidb-server` corresponding to the GC leader;
    2. View the log of the `tidb-server`, and grep gc_worker tidb.log;

>     3. If you find that the GC worker has been resolving locks (the last log is "start resolve locks") or deleting ranges (the last log is “start delete {number} ranges”) during this time, it means the GC process is running normally. Otherwise, contact `support@pingcap.com` to resolve this issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. If you find that the GC worker has been resolving locks (the last log is "start resolve locks") or deleting ranges (the last log is “start delete {number} ranges”) during this time, it means the GC process is running normally. Otherwise, contact [support@pingcap.com](mailto:support@pingcap.com) to resolve this issue.
```

### Critical-level alerts

For the critical-level alerts, a close watch on the abnormal metrics is required.

#### `TiKV_server_report_failure_msg_total`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(rate(tikv_server_report_failure_msg_total{type="unreachable"}[10m])) BY (store_id) > 10`

* Description:

    Indicates that the remote TiKV cannot be connected.

* Solution:

    1. Check whether the network is clear.
    2. Check whether the remote TiKV is down.

>     3. If the remote TiKV is not down, check whether the pressure is too high. Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#-tikv-channel-full-total).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. If the remote TiKV is not down, check whether the pressure is too high. Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#tikv-channel-full-total).
```

#### `TiKV_channel_full_total`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(rate(tikv_channel_full_total[10m])) BY (type, instance) > 0`

* Description:

    This issue is often caused by the stuck Raftstore thread and high pressure on TiKV.

* Solution:

>     1. Watch the Raft Propose monitor, and see whether the alerted TiKV node has a much higher raft propose than other TiKV nodes. If so, it means that there are one or more hot spots on this TiKV. You need to check whether the hot spot scheduling can work properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Watch the Raft Propose monitor, and see whether the alerted TiKV node has a much higher Raft propose than other TiKV nodes. If so, it means that there are one or more hot spots on this TiKV. You need to check whether the hot spot scheduling can work properly.
```

Author: `raft` should be replaced by "Raft"?

Author: The rest of the comments have been resolved. PTAL again @lilin90

Reviewer: > "raft" should be replaced by "Raft"? @lilin90

Yes, I think so. Ref: https://raft.github.io/

>     2. Watch the Raft IO monitor, and see whether the latency increases. If the latency is high, it means there might be a bottleneck in the disk. One feasible but unsafe solution is setting `sync-log` to `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Watch the Raft I/O monitor, and see whether the latency increases. If the latency is high, it means a bottleneck might exist in the disk. One feasible but unsafe solution is setting `sync-log` to `false`.
```

#### `TiKV_write_stall`

* Alert rule:

    `delta(tikv_engine_write_stall[10m]) > 0`

* Description:

    The write pressure on RocksDB is too high, and a stall occurs.

* Solution:

    1. View the disk monitor, and troubleshoot the disk issues;
    2. Check whether there is any write hot spot on the TiKV;
    3. Set `max-sub-compactions` to a larger value under the `[rocksdb]` and `[raftdb]` configurations.

#### `TiKV_raft_log_lag`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(tikv_raftstore_log_lag_bucket[1m])) by (le, instance)) > 5000`

* Description:

    If this value is relatively large, it means Follower has lagged far behind Leader, and Raft cannot be replicated normally. It is possibly because the TiKV machine where Follower is located is stuck or down.

#### `TiKV_async_request_snapshot_duration_seconds`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(tikv_storage_engine_async_request_duration_seconds_bucket{type="snapshot"}[1m])) by (le, instance, type)) > 1`

* Description:

    If this value is relatively large, it means the load pressure on Raftstore is too high, and it might be stuck already.

* Solution:

>     Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#-tikv-channel-full-total).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#tikv-channel-full-total).
```

#### `TiKV_async_request_write_duration_seconds`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(tikv_storage_engine_async_request_duration_seconds_bucket{type="write"}[1m])) by (le, instance, type)) > 1`

* Description:

    If this value is relatively large, it means the Raft write takes a long time.

* Solution:

>     1. Check the pressure on Raftstore. See the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#-tikv-channel-full-total).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Check the pressure on Raftstore. See the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#tikv-channel-full-total).
```

#### `TiKV_coprocessor_request_wait_seconds`

* Alert rule:

    `histogram_quantile(0.9999, sum(rate(tikv_coprocessor_request_wait_seconds_bucket[1m])) by (le, instance, req)) > 10`

* Description:

    If this value is relatively large, it means the pressure on the Coprocessor worker is high. There might be a slow task that makes the Coprocessor thread stuck.

* Solution:

    1. View the slow query log from the TiDB log to see whether the index or full table scan is used in a query, or see whether it is needed to analyze;
    2. Check whether there is a hot spot;
    3. View the Coprocessor monitor and see whether `total` and `process` in `coprocessor table/index scan` match. If they differ a lot, it indicates too many invalid queries are performed. You can see whether there is `over seek bound`. If so, there are too many versions that GC does not handle in time. Then you need to increase the number of parallel GC threads.

#### `TiKV_raftstore_thread_cpu_seconds_total`

* Alert rule:

    `sum(rate(tikv_thread_cpu_seconds_total{name=~"raftstore_.*"}[1m])) by (instance, name) > 1.6`

* Description:

    The pressure on the Raftstore thread is too high.

* Solution:

>     Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#-tikv-channel-full-total).

Reviewer: Please check and update all similar links.

```suggestion
    Refer to the solution in [`TiKV_channel_full_total`](#tikv-channel-full-total).
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: What does dev mean?

Author: master (the latest version)

Author: Do the changes above also apply to dev? @overvenus

Reviewer 2: Yes, they do.

Author: Already updated. PTAL again. @overvenus

title: TiDB Cluster Alert Rules
summary: Learn the alert rules in a TiDB cluster.
category: reference
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD024 -->

# TiDB Cluster Alert Rules

This document describes the alert rules for different components in a TiDB cluster, including TiDB, TiKV, PD, TiDB Binlog, Node_exporter and Blackbox_exporter. Each alert rule is classified according to their severity level - emergency, critical or warning.

> ## TiDB alert rules

Reviewer 3: LGTM (The TIDB part)
